Started to draft RN for Platform 5.3.0. (#649)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/release-notes/pages/5-3-0.adoc

= 5.3.0-BETA-2 Release Notes

== New Features

* **Connector for Kafka Connect source**: Import data from an external system directly into a Hazelcast data pipeline
without the need of a Kafka cluster.
* **Partition-Aware SQL Client**:  Send the SQL commands only to the members having the relevant data, which reduces the network hops and improves the query performances.

> * **Connector for MongoDB**: Set up read-through/write-through caching in MongoDB via this connector without writing any code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Connector for MongoDB**: Read and write from/to MongoDB via this connector and execute SQL queries on Mongo collections directly from Hazelcast.
```

** Extensive amount of Kubernetes API calls were being logged when Automatic State Management feature is enabled.
+
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23538[#23538]
* Added the support of discovering ECS and EC2 members on AWS. See xref:deploy:deploying-on-aws.adoc[Deploying a Cluster on Amazon AWS].
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22411[#22411]
* [.enterprise]*Enterprise* Enhanced the experience of using Hazelcast with persistence under Kubernetes by removing requirements for manual interventions. Previously, when there is a restart on such a cluster, the cluster states were needed to be changed manually. For some cases, this might have led to data loss. Now, the shutdown process is automated. See xref:kubernets:kubernetes-auto-discovery.adoc#running-hazelcast-enterprise-with-persistence-under-kubernetes[Configuring Kubernetes] for details.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/21844[#21844]

=== Storage

* Disk tier option of Tiered Storage is now disabled by default.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23747[#23747]

=== Distribution

> * Added the Kafka connector to the distribution.

Reviewer: Kafka Connect :)
Also, Mongo is missing

= 5.3.0 Release Notes

== New Features

* **xref:integrate:kafka-connect-connectors.adoc[Connector for Kafka Connect source]**: Import data from an external system directly into a Hazelcast data pipeline
without the need of a Kafka cluster.

> * **xref:integrate:mongodb-connector[Connector for MongoDB]**: Read and write from/to MongoDB via this connector and execute SQL queries on Mongo collections directly from Hazelcast.

Reviewer 2: These are in `Beta`

* Hazelcast no longer depends on JRuby; the JRuby `ScriptFactory` dependency must be explicitly added to the application.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23355[#23355]
* Added the Kafka Connect extension to the distribution.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23312[#23312]
* Shaded dependencies for Hazelcast Platform have been combined in a dedicated package (`com.hazelcast.shaded`).
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23124[#23124]

=== Networking

* Added socket options for per-socket keep-alive configuration: `keep-count`, `keep-idle-seconds`, and `keep-interval-seconds`.
You can set these options using either the advanced network configurations or Hazelcast system properties.
See xref:clusters:network-configuration.adoc#configuring-tcp-keep-alive[Configuring TCP Keep-Alive].
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23816[#23816], https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24050[#24050]

=== SQL Engine

* The `CREATE MAPPING` statement for Compact Serialization now supports nullable primitives.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24300[#24300]
* Implemented the `GET_DDL` function.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23595[#23595]

> * Implemented the `SHOW DATA LINKS` statement to show the connections created by the `CREATE CONNECTIONS` statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Implemented the `SHOW DATA CONNECTIONS` statement to show the connections created by the `CREATE CONNECTIONS` statement.
```

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24028[#24028]
* Added support of providing declarative partitioning strategies based on attributes. These attributes represent specific partition keys for a map.
You can also configure this strategy dynamically.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23535[#23535], https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23954[#23954]
* Improved the nested loop joins algorithm by making the `CreateDagVisitor` interface generic.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23368[#23368]
* Implemented the `TO_CHAR` function which is capable of formatting dates, timestamps, and numbers.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22529[#22529]
* Implemented `JSON=VARCHAR` comparison.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22746[#22746]

=== Jet Engine

* Each Jet engine job was creating a client for connecting to the remote cluster, resulting in an excessive number of clients.

> This has been fixed by introducing a single data store which can be reused for all job instances.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This has been fixed by introducing a single data connection which can be reused for all job instances.
```

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23472[#23472], https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23849[#23849]
* Added MongoDB read (source) and write (sink) processors.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23348[#23348]
* Added new messages (`uploadJobMetaData` and `uploadJobMultipart`) to the binary client protocol to be able to

> execute non-Java codes for streaming data pipelines, i.e., to submit Jet jobs.

Reviewer 2: This is not public API, not sure if it should be in RN.

Author: Removed

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23212[#23212]

> * Introduced `JobListener` as an alternative to retrieve a job status via the `Job.getStatus()` method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Introduced `JobStatusListener` as an alternative to retrieving job status via `Job.getStatus()` method.
```

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22602[#22602]
* Fixed an issue where a CP Subsystem object could be destroyed without a permission even the object has security and permission configurations enabled.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22475[#22475]
* Fixed an issue where external data store configurations could not be added dynamically.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22450[#22450]
* Fixed an issue where replication over WAN was failing on the source cluster members, when there are multiple batch publishers configured in a single WAN replication.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22437[#22437]
* Fixed an issue where the map entries recovered from persistence were not expiring after their time-to-live durations.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22279[#22279]
* Fixed an issue where Hazelcast 5.1.x members in a Spring Boot application could not establish a connection to each other when deployed
in Kubernetes cluster with Istio Envoy Proxy enabled.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/issues/22256[#22256]

== Contributors

We would like to thank the contributors from our open source community
who worked on this release:

> * https://github.com/ivyanni[Ilia Vianni]

Reviewer 4: we have more community contributions in this release: https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pulls?q=is%3Apr+milestone%3A5.3.0+is%3Aclosed+label%3A%22source%3A+community%22+-author%3Aapp%2Fdependabot

= 5.3.0 Release Notes

== New Features

* **xref:integrate:kafka-connect-connectors.adoc[Connector for Kafka Connect source (BETA)]**: Import data from an external system directly into a Hazelcast data pipeline
without the need of a Kafka cluster.
* **xref:integrate:mongodb-connector[Connector for MongoDB (BETA)]**: Read and write from/to MongoDB via this connector and execute SQL queries on Mongo collections directly from Hazelcast.
* **https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/blob/master/docs/design/sql/16-partition-aware-client.md[Partition-Aware SQL Client]**: Send the SQL commands only to the members having the relevant data, which reduces the network hops and improves the query performances.

== Breaking Changes

> * Renamed the `DataLinkFactory` interface as `DataConnection`.

Reviewer 5: if think there might have been some breaking changes in the PRs I created or merged, but I do not remember now in which ones

Reviewer 5: https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24282
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23848

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/21844[#21844]

=== Storage

* Disk tier option of Tiered Storage is now disabled by default.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23747[#23747]

=== Distribution

* Hazelcast no longer depends on JRuby; the JRuby `ScriptFactory` dependency must be explicitly added to the application.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23355[#23355]
* Added the Kafka Connect extension to the distribution.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23312[#23312]
* Shaded dependencies for Hazelcast Platform have been combined in a dedicated package (`com.hazelcast.shaded`).
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23124[#23124]

=== Networking

* Added socket options for per-socket keep-alive configuration: `keep-count`, `keep-idle-seconds`, and `keep-interval-seconds`.
You can set these options using either the advanced network configurations or Hazelcast system properties.
See xref:clusters:network-configuration.adoc#configuring-tcp-keep-alive[Configuring TCP Keep-Alive].
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23816[#23816], https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24050[#24050]

> === SQL Engine

Author: Sasha mentions that Cast as JSON is not a release notes matter. Will check the others.

* The `CREATE MAPPING` statement for Compact Serialization now supports nullable primitives.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24300[#24300]
* Implemented the `GET_DDL` function.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23595[#23595]

> * Implemented the `SHOW DATA CONNECTIONS` statement to show the connections created by the `CREATE CONNECTIONS` statement.

Reviewer 5: entire data connection management in SQL was implemented as part of 5.3, there are also other command like `SHOW RESOURCES`

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24028[#24028]
* Added support of providing declarative partitioning strategies based on attributes. These attributes represent specific partition keys for a map.
You can also configure this strategy dynamically.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23535[#23535], https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23954[#23954]

> * Improved the nested loop joins algorithm by making the `CreateDagVisitor` interface generic.

Reviewer 5: NLJ was not improved, the change was only a refactor, not important for users

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23368[#23368]
* Implemented the `TO_CHAR` function which is capable of formatting dates, timestamps, and numbers.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22529[#22529]
* Implemented `JSON=VARCHAR` comparison.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22746[#22746]

=== Jet Engine

> * Each Jet engine job was creating a client for connecting to the remote cluster, resulting in an excessive number of clients.

Reviewer 5: missing: 
- ability to change suspended jobs config (JET and SQL)

This has been fixed by introducing a single data connection which can be reused for all job instances.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23472[#23472], https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23849[#23849]
* Added MongoDB read (source) and write (sink) processors.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23348[#23348]

> * Introduced `JobStatusListener` as an alternative to retrieve a job status via the `Job.getStatus()` method.

Reviewer 5: It is alternative to querying `Job.getStatus()` repeatedly

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23193[#23193]
* Updated the https://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/{page-latest-supported-java-client}/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/Job.html#isUserCancelled--[job API] to add the ability
to distinguish the user-cancelled jobs from the failed ones.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22924[#22924]
* Added `flock` to guard all the concurrent `pip` executions (upgrading `pip` and `protobuf` versions) in the Jet-to-Python script.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22829[#22829]

=== Security

* Added the TLS configuration property `keyMaterialDuration` which allows using a configurable timeout for caching keyStores and trustStores.
See xref:security:tls-configuration.adoc[TLS Configuration] for the details on how to configure this property.

> https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23307[#23307]

Reviewer 5: as part of "security" (by obscurity) it is impossible now to create SQL mappings for `__sql.catalog` and `__jet.*` - technically a breaking change

=== Serialization

* Hazelcast now allows serializing unsupported types via xref:serialization:compact-serialization.adoc#using-compact-serialization-with-zero-configuration[zero-configuration]
provided that there is an explicit serializer implemented for the unsupported type.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23449[#23449]
* Setting a generic record now fails if the value is not of the same type of generic record.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23522[#23522]
* Introduced clearer exception messages for Generic MapStore, instead of `UndefinedErrorCodeException`.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22765[#22765]

=== WAN Replication

* Added the REST endpoint `/hazelcast/rest/wan/sync/progress` which allows tracking the WAN synchronization progress.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22958[#22958]

=== Connectors

> * Added support of predicates in DML (Data Manipulation Language) in JDBC SQL connector.

Reviewer 5: Preserve order of mapping with implicit field order definition for JDBC (https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22760) is worth mentioning

Reviewer 5: also community contribution to Kafka connector: https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/21546

=== Other Enhancements

* _External Data Store_ references have been renamed as _Data Connections. This includes the renaming of the `external-data-store` configuration element as `data-connection`.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24224[#24224]
* Added the ability to test whether the connection with a JDBC data link is valid (`testConnection` method for `JdbcDataConnection`).
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/23405[#23405]
* Upgraded Apache Calcite to 1.32.0.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/22849[#22849]

== Fixes

* Fixed an issue where multiple Hazelcast members were able to use the same base directory for Tiered Storage, causing crashes. #5770
* Fixed an issue where the members were crashing while they are loading data into the NATIVE memory and using JSON or Kryo serialization. #5384
* Fixed an issue where `map.clear()` was timing out when the map is configured with a generic map store.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24534[#24534] 
* Fixed an issue where the `SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT COLUMN)` query for maps was producing incorrect results.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/pull/24464[#24464]

> * Fixed an issue where there was a memory leak when High-Density Memory Store is used and Jet engine metrics are enabled.

Reviewer 5: this is unrelated to HD

https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/issues/23492[#23492]
* Fixed an issue where the `DELETE FROM` or `UPDATE` functions, when used with fully-qualified names, was failing in a JDBC table.
https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast/issues/23476[#23476]

> * Fixed an issue where Data Definition Language (DDL) could not be generated for a map with High-Density Memory Store and having no indexes.

Reviewer 5: nit: rather improvement than a bug fix
